PAGETITLE	Dread Pirate Kermit / Ken Morton memorial site: Ride Reports: Border to Border Insanity!
PARAGRAPH	<pre>From: Ken Morton<br />Date: Mon, Mar 29, 2010 at 9:55 PM</br >Subject: Border to Border Insanity</br >To: "LD Riders"</pre>
PARAGRAPH	If this were a Greek tragedy, it would be a cautionary tale against hubris. If it were a made-for-TV movie, the ending would have taken a darker twist, and I'd be sitting in a Federal facility somewhere wearing an orange jumpsuit. But I'm getting ahead of myself.
PARAGRAPH	In 2008 I started planning an Iron Butt Association ® Border-to-Border ride. Actually, I planned a Border-to-Border-to-Border ride, starting in Sweetgrass, BC and ending across from Yuma, AZ, and then returning back to Sweetgrass. I was talking with my friend Jeff Earls about the ride one day, and Jeff said I should do the whole thing in 48 hours because "lots of people do it in 48 hours." Well, if you count 9 people as lots, I suppose that is true. I ended up scratching that ride because I got laid off a couple months later but the seed of a B2B run had been planted.
PARAGRAPH	<a href="http://www.ironbutt.com/ridecerts/getdocument.cfm?DocID=21">http://www.ironbutt.com/ridecerts/getdocument.cfm?DocID=21</a>
PARAGRAPH	Fast forward to 2010. I'm now a student and I have 2 weeks off for Spring Break. I start planning the B2B again but because of finances decide that the I-5 corridor will be better. There are more large towns though, and slower speed limits through Oregon and Washington which makes doing the 24 hour "Insanity" version a little harder. I plug it into Streets and Trips with 4 gas stops at approximately 300 mile intervals plug in 15 minute breaks at 2 of the gas stops, 20 minutes at another and a 30 minute break the last. Streets and Trips shows 21 hours 2 minutes, and 1403.7 miles for the one-way run.
PARAGRAPH	Two people from the LD Riders list agree to witness the start and end of the ride for me. I can't say enough about how helpful these guys were. Craig Chaddock in San Diego, and David Morrow from Vancouver, BC went above and beyond to make sure I had a successful ride. Although a lot of long distance riding is about the individual on the bike, it's the support people behind the scene that allow us to be successful.  Chris and David were an integral part of my success, as were Ted Timmons, Beth Heins and my wife Lisa. Thanks to them all!
TITLE	Thursday, March 25, 2010, 6:00 AM, Vancouver, WA.
PARAGRAPH	The alarm went off and I got up trying not to wake Lisa. That never works so I got her coffee. I was out the door on the road by 6:45, not too bad. The ride south was uneventful for the most part. It snowed over the Siskiyou mountains: no surprise. It was a small hard snow and didn't stress me out much. I stopped at the "Welcome to California" sign and snapped a picture with Oswald.</p>
sany0521.jpg	Welcome to California!
TITLE	Thursday, March 25, 2010, 5:00 PM, Oakland, CA.
PARAGRAPH	I had to ride around the block a couple of times to find a parking spot at "Lanesplitter" pizza on Telegraph. Beth showed up on her bicycle while I was still fussing with gear and getting my phone out to call Lisa. Beth had been watching my SPOT track and was worried that I was going to get to pizza way before her. Traffic slowed me some (love that lane splitting!) so we arrived about the same time.
PARAGRAPH	Some of her coworkers were already there and we had good pizza, good beer and good conversations. Henry, the 2-year old son of one coworker friend - liked the bike and my Kermit the Frog tattoo. Oswald was gracious enough to pose with the gang.
sany0523.jpg	Beth (blue coat on left) and Peeps. Oswald hanging out on the dash, cool as a cucumber.
TITLE	Thursday, March 25, 2010, 8:30 PM, Oakland, CA
PARAGRAPH	I'd brought down my old Shuttle computer strapped to the top of one of my panniers for a friend in Santa Clara. He rode over and picked it up, and the three of us stood outside Beth's apartment building chatting. It was cool but not cold, and I think of about much I like California. Except the traffic of course. And the smog. And all those people. OK, I really like VISITING California.
TITLE	Friday, March 26, 2010, 6:00 AM, Oakland, CA.
PARAGRAPH	I'm up and off again. Beth wakes up long enough to bid me goodbye, and wish me well on my trip. I pack everything in one load - Beth's apartment in a 4th floor walk-up - and waddle down to the bike. By 6:30 or so I'm headed south. I make a side trip up Mt. Hamilton and down the other side in memory of a major bonus fubar I had in the 2007 Iron Butt Rally. These roads - tight mountain corners, many blind - are much more fun on the little V-Strom than they were on the loaded Goldwing I was on in 2007. I stop and snap a couple pictures of the valley below and head back down to find breakfast.
sany0524.jpg
sany0526.jpg
TITLE	Friday, March 26, 2010, 3:30 PM, North of San Diego, CA
PARAGRAPH	When it comes to lane splitting, I am a pussy compared to the locals.  I pick my way carefully through the cars moving barely faster than they are, while the locals slice and dice their way through 20 to 30 miles per hour faster than me. The traffic jam starts 30 miles north of San Diego and lasts pretty well until the 805 bypass, which I take.
sany0531.jpg	North of San Diego, before traffic got too bad.
PARAGRAPH	I find my hotel just a couple of miles from the Mexican border, and call my San Diego witness Craig. We arrange to meet at 5:00 AM the next morning in Otay Mesa and then I head off to find some food. The Mexican restaurant recommended by the hotel manager is closed, so I settle for Church's fried chicken which hits the spot. I head back to the hotel after stopping to top off the gas tanks and get a few road munchies for tomorrow.
TITLE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 4:00 AM, San Diego, CA
PARAGRAPH	The Screaming Meanie goes off at four and in deference to the other motel guests; I have it set at minimum volume. Every since the 2007 IBR I seem to have a visceral response to the sound of a Screaming Meanie; almost Pavlovian you could say. It makes me shudder and I get this knot in the pit of my stomach. At any rate, I am up and out on the road in 30 minutes or so.
PARAGRAPH	Close to Otay Mesa, I notice another bike come up on my left. He slows and paces me and I assume correctly that this is Craig. We meet at a stop light, and he follows me into the AM/PM. Craig signs my witness form and I reset both GPS's trip computers. My official start time will be in Mexico at the Pemex station, but I will probably be too busy there to remember to reset the GPS's so I do it here. Craig and I snap some pictures including one with Oswald and Craig. Craig wishes me luck, and I make a run for the border.
sany0534.jpg	San Diego Witness Craig. Clock says 4:55 AM.
img_7826.jpg	Me in San Diego before ride. Photo by Craig.
PARAGRAPH	Crossing into Mexico is too easy. The US Customs agent asks me one or two questions, and waves me through. I had a good idea of where the Pemex station was, but in the dark things are not quite as clear.  Fortunately the exit is marked, and I get to the gas station directly. De Las Ballas Aries, the road the Pemex station is on, is under construction and in the dark navigating it is, well, interesting.
TITLE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 5:07 AM, Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico ODO 16447
PARAGRAPH	I thought the Pemex station had card readers on the pumps; I was wrong. The attendant has no English, and my 7th grade Spanish has mostly long since disappeared. I tell him "un poquito" and hand him 3 American dollars. He pulls out a calculator, crunches some numbers and sets the pump. Through gestures, I make him understand I need a receipt, which he hand writes. I add the time, and take some pictures of the bike in the Pemex station. I was hoping to get a SPOT track south of the border as well, but that doesn't happen. Of course, my GPS tracks show me there.
sany0536.jpg	Pemex station, Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico.
sany0537.jpg	Pemex pump and attendant.
PARAGRAPH	I pull out of the station, and go the first light and make a left. A quick U-Turn on the side street, and I head back up De Las Ballas Aries, and make another left at the next light. I ride up that side street, which ends up being the wrong road. Another quick Turn, and back to De Las Ballas Aries to make a right. If this were the US, there would be lots of street lights, and finding the on ramp would have been much easier. However, it's Mexico, and it is dark. After making the turn though, my HID picks out the ramp and I head toward the border.
PARAGRAPH	A polite window-washer waves me forward when I stop behind the line, and so I lane-split to the front. The cars there make room for me, and in no time I'm taking to the customs agent.  We chat, and I tell him what I am up too. He asks about the big box on the rear of the bike, and I explain it's a gas tank, and remove the cap so he can shine his flashlight inside. He wishes me luck, hands me back my passport and sends me on my way.
img_7835.jpg	Here I go! Love that HID.
vidcap2.jpg	Me leaving Mexico.
TITLE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 5:24 AM, Otay Mesa (San Diego), California
PARAGRAPH	I don't know this until later, but Craig snaps a shot of me coming across the boarder, and a great video of me accelerating up the on-ramp. My little Wee sounds great as I 'get on it' taking off. I'm using the 5:07 AM time as my start, so I figure I have about 23:45 to make it to Canada. The Zumo says I'll make it there at 1:22 AM, but I know that's going to be off because of stops. Still, it's nice to know I have about a 3 hour cushion for problems.
TTILE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 9:18 AM, Lost Hills, California. ODO 16747
PARAGRAPH	This is my first planned gas stop. I did the first leg without a stop, other than when the motor officer stopped the 405 in LA to remove some debris from the road. Speaking of which, my route is very simple; I took the 905 from Otay Mesa to the I-5 and then stayed on I-5 except for the I-405 loop around downtown Los Angeles. According to the odometer on the bike, this leg was 300 miles which means it was probably closer to 285. In my planning, I gave myself at least 15 minutes for each gas stop, and decided that I would remove my helmet and earphones each time. 15 minutes can seem like a long time if you are used to 24 hour rally gas stops, where often I try to get in and out in 5 minutes. Or they can seem like a short time if you are used to long stops chatting with riding companions. I find 15 minutes lets me do everything I need to do without feeling overly rushed.
TITLE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 1:16 PM, Dunnigan, California. ODO 17034
PARAGRAPH	Another non-stop leg and so far the weather has been perfect. It is starting to warm up, and I'm a little hungry so I grab a Ultimate Cheeseburger at the Jack In The Box and put it in the tank bag. This stop is a little longer, probably 25-30 minutes, as I take time to spray chain wax on the chain, buy some drinks and grab the burger.  Once back on the freeway, I flip up my Shoei Multitec and eat the burger flying down the road. My new Etymonic ER-6i earphone wires keep blowing around and I end up with a mouthful of cheese burger and cord.  I carefully extract the cord and try not to think about the dead bugs that are probably all over it already. It happens again a couple bites later, and after that I hold the cord out of the way as I grab a bite.  I.ve got two bicycle water bottles on the bike, one full of water and the other I swap between A&amp;W Root beer and Lipton Ice Tea. This works pretty well until late the next morning when it's cold enough I don't want to flip the chin-bar up.
TITLE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 5:31 PM, Medford, Oregon. ODO 17315.
PARAGRAPH	These rides are about chewing miles, and I am doing that in spades. My running average is staying high, and I just keep clicking off the miles. I have over 800 miles down in the first 12 hours, and while I know the last hours will be slower, I'm still on a good pace to be in well under 24 hours. On this leg I have two extra stops, one to shed clothes, and one to add clothes. It got very warm and finally stopped at a rest stop outside Corning to remove my Gerbing jacket liner and swap to a lighter pair of gloves. I knew it would cool off as I started to climb, so I put the heavier gloves in my tank bag where I could reach them.
sany0540.jpg	There she is! What a pretty mountain.
PARAGRAPH	The climb up Mt. Shasta was beautiful. This is my kind of road; big fast sweepers where I can ignore the speed caution signs and just lean the bike over. The Meztler Tourance rear, Michelin Anakee front I have on the bike stick like sport rubber compared to the stock V-Strom Bridgestones, and I'm loving it. The sky is blue, the snow startling white, and I'm in my element. I stop at the rest area on top of Shasta to put my Gerbing liner back on having long since swapped back to the warm gloves, and take time to snap a picture of the mountain.
sany0542.jpg	At the rest stop on Shasta.
PARAGRAPH	Before I know it, I'm crossing the border into Oregon, and see the hated 55 MPH speed limit sign. I know my average speed will slow from here on north, but I'm not worried. I cross the Siskiyou in blue skies and daylight, and in my hubris pump my fist at making it through the one stretch I was worried about. I figured if I could make it over that pass, the ride was more or less in the bag. My stopped time is reasonable, and the Zumo shows my arrival time around 1:30 AM. I gas up in Medford, grab an ice tea and hop back on my old friend I-5.
PARAGRAPH	I stopped in Cottage Grove for another cheese burger, Burger King this time, and a bio break. I'm obviously drinking OK on this leg. This Burger King has to be one of the slowest ever, and I am glad I can eat the burger back on the road. This time I manage to keep the earphone cords out of my mouth.
PARAGRAPH	I hate Portland drivers. Maybe because they are local and I know them so damn well. "Keep right except to pass" is the law, but you sure as hell can't tell that in Portland. Or Seattle for that matter. I slice and dice my way through traffic to the sound of Prodigy's "Smack My Bitch Up." It somehow seems appropriate.
TITLE	Saturday, March 27, 2010, 9:59 PM, Vancouver, Washington. ODO 17610.
PARAGRAPH	I'm 1.2 miles from home at this gas stop. It turns out that I'm about 10 minutes behind Lisa, who has been out to dinner with Ted and his wife, and looks for me at the gas station as she heads home. Chain wax and fresh A&amp;W are in order at this stop. There is a group of import car 'tuners' in the gas station, twenty and thirty year olds with shiny Toyota's, Honda's and Nissan's. Their cute girlfriends are snapping pictures, and wearing jeans so tight they threaten to split when they move. Even though this is my neighborhood gas station, it seems foreign for some reason. Gassed, root-beer'd, and chain waxed, I turn away from my house and head north.
PARAGRAPH	Tacoma traffic is much worse than I expected, and again there are slow-pokes in the left lane. I move in and out, trying to be smooth and not overly aggressive while still making time. I grew up in Tacoma, and this road is so familiar. All of I-5 is to some extent actually. I know people curse freeways, and some hate to ride them, but I-5 has always meant home for me. When I was in boot camp in San Diego, it was comforting to know the same freeway that was there lead home.
PARAGRAPH	Seattle at 12:30 on a Sunday morning is busier than I expected.  Through downtown I have Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers "Running down a Dream" playing along. I'm still feeling pretty good, even though I have a bunch of aches and pains. Physically, long distance motorcycling is not unlike long distance bicycling. In both, it's the mind that makes or breaks you. You are going to physically hurt; in bicycling your legs turn to lead, your arms go numb, your ass hurts.  On the motorcycle my back is my weak link, and frankly has hurt for the last 3 days. It's actually getting better, but I have to remember to move once in a while or I stiffen up. My wrists were in agony on Thursday, not used to the angle and my hands cramp from holding the throttle. My legs go numb from holding position and pressure from my weight. But as long as my mind is doing OK, I am doing OK. The physical aches and pains are minor annoyances I deal with. It's hard to explain to someone who has never done it, who focuses on the physical. I can be "hurting" and still feel fine, because my mind is still in a good place. It's not until my mind gets tired that I struggle.
PARAGRAPH	Mentally, I am sharp and having fun "playing" in the Seattle traffic.  The GPS is showing about a 2:30 arrival time, which is still very good. The speed limit has been 60 pretty much since Olympia, but I'm still doing fine on time. Again, I knew this part would be slower, so it doesn't bother me all that much.
PARAGRAPH	Within an hour I am fading though. There is something about getting close to your destination that starts breaking down the mental barriers. I'm ready for a bed and a few hours of sleep. I need a bio break again, and need to call David to make sure he knows I am going to be much earlier than the 6 AM arrival time we'd agreed upon. I pull off the freeway, use the restroom and dig out my phone. There is a text-message that says "Good Morning, I'm on my way", and I think "Great, I don't need to call David." There is also a phone message from Lisa telling me about bridge construction in Portland. That's not really important now, so I delete it.
PARAGRAPH	Back on the freeway, I think about the text message. Was it from David this morning or from Craig yesterday? Crap, I don't know. I pull into a closed weigh station, get the phone out and call David's house. His girlfriend answers, and tells me David has left and expects to arrive at Peace Arch at 2:15 AM. She asks me where I am, and all I can say is about an hour out as I'm not sure what town I am close too.
PARAGRAPH	That last hour is the hardest of the whole ride. My arms are starting to go numb. I can feel them on the bars and do what I need with them, but they feel like they are stuffed with cotton, or maybe made of wood. I slow and focus on what I am doing, taking a little more care than normal. As the Zumo extorts me to pull of the freeway, I realize I never changed the end point in the routing from Sumas to Peace Arch so I turn the routing off. I'm pretty sure I just need to stay on I-5 until I get to the border crossing, and that's what I do arriving about 2:15 AM.
PARAGRAPH	Up to this point the weather has been cooperative. Sure, it's a little cold, and my poor toes are frozen, but it's been dry the whole way. I remember thinking in Bellingham about how lucky I'd been with the weather. Two days ago it was raining cats and dogs up here.
TITLE	Sunday, March 28, 2010, 2:15 AM, Surry, BC, Canada. ODO 17890
PARAGRAPH	This is where it all goes sideways. Hint: When at a border crossing, do not mention that you just came from Mexico, and do not mention that you don't know the person that you are meeting all that well. What I should have said is that I was coming from Vancouver, WA and headed to Vancouver, BC, both true. I got handed my passport and a yellow slip for a secondary inspection.
PARAGRAPH	Inside, the serious young man asked a number of questions, and then left me standing while he went out to look over the bike. Where 'look over' means 'search'. In the meantime David wandered down from the visitor's center where he'd been waiting. At first, the customs agents told David he was in a secure area, but eventually they allowed him to come inside. By that time the customs agents had pulled a FBI report on me.
PARAGRAPH	"Why are your fingerprints on file with the FBI?" he wanted to know.  It turned out that Canadian customs found an irregularity in my FBI records dating back to when I was fingerprinted for the USN. Because of that, I was "allowed" to withdraw my application to enter Canada.  On the upside I get an official paper saying I was in Canada on March 28th. As David, the customs agent and I walk out of the customs house I notice it is now pouring down rain. Huzzah.
PARAGRAPH	The customs agent is serious, but nice and allows David to sign my witness form, and for me to snap a picture of David and David one of me. I'm slow getting geared up and ask the agent if he is in a hurry.  "Take your time, I'm here all night." On the bike he hands me my passport, and a paper for US customs and points me back south. I thank him and ride to the US border.
sany0543.jpg	My BC witness David. The 2610 shows 1401 miles, and the clock says 3:13 AM. This is after I've been hanging around for almost an hour in Canadian Customs.
TITLE	Sunday, March 28, 2010, 3:20 AM, Blaine, Washington
PARAGRAPH	The US customs agent pulls me in for another secondary search. The agent inside is nice and he tells me to relax I'm back in the US. He asks me if the bike is unlocked and invites me to sit while he searches the bike.
PARAGRAPH	He comes back with a second agent, an ernest young woman. "Who is Lisa Kin-ell-e?" he asks. "Keen-lee", I correct him, "she's my wife".
PARAGRAPH	"Why do you have her medication with you?"
PARAGRAPH	"Probably because I grabbed the wrong bottle out of the medicine cabinet."
PARAGRAPH	Whoops. They decide that I'm not really trying to smuggle my wife's medications back into the USA, and after a short while kick me loose.
PARAGRAPH	Under the cover of the search area I took my time gearing up. No one walked me to my bike this time, and I was dead tired. I rode out of the customs parking into the dark and pouring rain, my B2B Insanity complete.
TITLE	Postscript
PARAGRAPH	I did the Border to Border in about 21 ½ hours. David signed my witness form with and end time of 2:30 AM, as that is the time he and I actually connected.  It was 1401 miles per the 2610 GPS, and a little more by the odometer on the V-Strom. Both measured from Otay Mesa on the US side to the Pemex station in Mexico, and then to the Canadian Customs house.
PARAGRAPH	I rode south from the Canadian border to the Super 8 in Ferndale and got a room. It was after 4 AM by the time I was in the room, but I called Lisa to let her know I was safe. I know that it's better to call and wake her at 4 AM than let her worry. I got up later the same morning about 10, showered and called Lisa again to let her know I was headed south. I told her I'd be home between 4 and 5:30 PM, if it was much later I'd call. I pulled in the garage at 4:03.
PARAGRAPH	The ride home was very wet. I had breakfast and the Fork and Knife in Mt. Vernon, a nice Mom 'n Pop place, where they seemed to know at least half of the customers. The food was good, the prices reasonable, and the service excellent. What else can you ask for? One last gas fill-up in Mt. Vernon, where I got sidetracked talking to a fellow V-Strom owner about my farkles and additions. I think I was there for longer than any 3 of my B2B gas stops!
PARAGRAPH	Speaking of farkles and additions, most worked very well. The speedometer on the bike quit working on the way down, and simply unplugging a factory plug and squirting some WD-40 on it resolved the problem. My Heads-Up-Voltage monitor either doesn't like my HID's or is toast, as it's hit or miss; working sometimes and not at others.  The radar detector has a voltmeter so the Heads-Up is not critical.  Both GPS's worked well, and the new aux gas tank never had a hiccup, although I need a spare O-ring for the cap as the one on there is loose and I could see losing it easily. I killed a digital camera; it was in a case but something got stacked on it and broke the LCD screen. My favorite pink camera too, darn it. The HID's were a treat, particularly when I fired them both off on dark stretches. Let there be light!
PARAGRAPH	A final note to all who are contemplating a border-to-border ride: maybe don't mention you just came from Mexico to the Canadian border agents at 0-Dark thirty. I'm just saying.
PARAGRAPH	<pre>--<br />Dread Pirate Kermit<br />IBA #257</pre>
FOOTER
