


From: Ken Morton <k7fle@yahoo.com>
Subject: I went for a ride yesterday..
To: "LD Rider", OBS
Date: Tuesday, January 14, 2003, 6:11 PM

Yep her it is, another epic length Ken ride report. :-) And you thought winter would keep me inside.

Jan 14. 03.

Yesterday morning, I was wandering around the apartment feeling restless. My girlfriend sensed my restlessness, and asked what I had planned for the day. “I was thinking about taking a ride up to have dinner with my sisters.” I said. “Might get wet coming home, but I think you should.” She replied. And then to top it off, she offered to do my laundry for me while I went.  Are you jealous yet?

I geared up, tossed in my overnight kit just in case; raingear and silk long johns for the ride home and liter of A&W root beer. I wore my ‘lectric vest, flannel lounge pants and a long sleeve T under my regular gear. Going up, I was plenty warm, only running the vest when I headed off the beaten path into the hills, and into the fog that persisted there all day.
  
I tooled up I-5, cruising along at 70-ish and stopped for gas in Kelso, at my usual exit. I think I need to change gas stops, as the AM/PM there is a pay-before-you-play pump, and it never wants to accept my cash. I ended up using my ATM card, and then felt stupid when I went in to get my change. I took me a moment to remember that I had used the card, not the $10 bill I’d been tying to stuff into the uncooperative rob-me-at-the-pump machine.

Baby-wing filled, and me drained, I headed back north up I-5. A short while later I was trying to figure out why the pick-up I was coming up on fast had these weird blue and red loading lights on the back of it’s canopy. Eventually I made out the “Washington State Patrol” lettering on the top of the canopy and rethought the right-side pass I was about to make at about 9 over. “Hmmm, maybe I’ll just get off the freeway here, and take my favorite side road” went through my mind as I saw the Toutle-Castle Rock exit coming up.

My favorite road in this area is Taylor road, which runs more or less north off of Highway 504, and later rejoins highway 504.  This is a two-lane road, marked at about 40-45MPH for the most part that winds through the local farm countryside. Not much traffic and in excellent shape, with nice tight corners at the ends, fast sweepers in the middle, and no real nasty bike-eating corners to speak of.  There was some sand here at the beginning from earlier snows, but nothing that wasn’t easily avoidable. After a mile or so, the sand seemed to run out, and the road was clear, if a bit damp the rest of the way. I had a great time, except for one blind left-hander. Fortunately, I’d slowed considerably, as I couldn’t tell how sharp this corner was. Some geezer was turning left and he’d crossed the centerline into my lane to make his turn. There was a moment there I wasn’t sure if I was going to get around him in my lane, or if I should use his. He moved back over, while I moved towards the far right, and all was well.

I wish I’d had a camera with me. I always seem to forget it on these quickie trips. There were a couple shots I’d love to have gotten. On I-5 there was a pastoral scene; picture a pond, still as midnight, 2 horses standing ankle deep in grass that was that green I only see in Washington in the winter, all shrouded in fog and a backdrop of evergreen trees. Another one on Taylor road; I’d been riding through a forest and came around a corner to a mare and her yearling in a pasture, again with fog sitting in the hollow. Right out of ‘Sleepy Hollow’, except here in Washington on a Monday morning.

Like I said, Taylor eventually reconnects with Highway 504, which I followed the short distance to highway 505, which takes me into the picturesque city of Toledo. I continued north out of Toledo on the Jackson Highway all the way to Centralia. Hmm, should stop by Mom’s for coffee, or continue on? I wanted to get on north, and uh, Mom can be a talker, so I hopped on I-5 just up to the next exit, towards Tenino. I decided to stop in Tenino and grab a bite, since it was about 1:30 in the afternoon by this time. There is a 50’s diner there that I’ve always wanted to stop at, and this seemed like a good time.  In the summer there is always a few bikes parked around, and I was surprised to see a few today. Inside I met the owners of the scoots, three lovely ladies out for a girls ride and eat. We chatted some, and I told them about my ride to Albuquerque in October. “That sounds like one of those Ironbutt things,” said one of the ladies; “It should be called a Deadbutt” chimed in one of the others, getting a laugh from us all.  Naturally, I *had* to tell them that I am going to be doing the Iron Butt Rally this year. “Your bike must be pretty comfortable” one of them commented. “Yeah…right…..” <grin>

After a pretty good grilled ham’n’cheese, and more importantly a more than pretty good couple cups of coffee, I headed out through the bustling suburbs of Rainer, Yelm and McKenna. Turning West out of McKenna on highway 702, I headed through thick fog. Blech.  I couldn’t get my visor to sit in that almost-but-not quite closed position, so it kept fogging, and I’d have to pop it open. Finally, fog lifted almost magically, and I was rewarded with Mt. Rainer rising snow covered out of the mists. Cloud capped and looking majestic, this one sight is worth the entire trip.  I zipped north on highway 7 to Kapowsin Highway, and then north again on Kapowsin-Orting highway. I managed to navigate down the hill through the fog, and into more fog hanging in the Orting valley, and to my big sisters house. 4 half hours for roughly 185 miles and lunch; no record but a nice ride.

After dinner with my two OLDER sisters, it was time to leave. Ugh, the weatherman was right for a change, and the rain had moved in. Little did I know that it was going to rain ALL the way home. Oh well, glad I hit the back-roads on the way up; it’ll be the I-5 slab all the way home. I added the long johns and looked in my tail trunk for my pant liners. Naturally, they are safe and warm at home in my saddlebags. Oh well, it shouldn’t be that cold going home, I thought.  I bought some over-booties last summer, and other than one commute home haven’t used them. This seems like a good time to see how well they work. My new ‘waterproof’ gloves should get a good work out. They have been working pretty well around town, but now I get to see how they will work at freeway speeds in constant rain. Let’s say they are “waterproof for about 1 ½ hours” gloves, and leave it at that.  Unfortunately, it was a 3-hour ride home.

I’d noticed a couple minor stumbles on the ride up, but they were the kind that I couldn’t tell if it was a stumble for just me jerking the throttle. The gloves are snowmobile, so I’m not butter-smooth with them on. Well, as soon as I started up the 520 hill out of Puyallup, the bike stumbled hard. I reached for the reserve switch, but the motor caught back and I hesitated. A couple beats later, and it did it again.  Weird I thought, as I switched to reserve, way early at only about 138 miles. The bike stumbled again, and now I’m worried because it takes quite a while to catch. Remember, I am trying to get up the 520 hill, with traffic flowing around me at 60 MPH, and rain coming down hard.  And of course, it’s dark. I head towards the outside lane, just in case and drop down to fourth gear. And of course twist the throttle harder.  Why do we always do that? Never fails, a motor stumbles, and we whack the throttle in the hopes that it will magically heal itself. This time it works, at least momentarily, and I made it to the top of the hill. I decided to keep going and see if I could make my usual gas stop at the Steele St. exit. The bike made cut out a number more times before I got there, and I finally figured out that it’s actually dropping a cylinder, effectively going from a 500cc twin to a 250cc single. I find that by down shifting to fourth, I can keep moving at 55mph, albeit
with the motor straining a bit.

I get gas; drain the float bowls in the hope that it’s just water, and twizzle the spark plug boots. Back on the freeway, and onto I-5, and for a brief moment I think I’ve solved my problems. Nope, there it is again. Sheet. Should I keep going, or call the local CX guru for advice? The further south I’m heading, the farther from help I’m going.  I keep going, if nothing else I can call Mom to the rescue in Centralia. Going through Olympia is a trial, with the bike going to one cylinder for minuets at a time - egad, let’s hope it makes it up the hill! Finally, in frustration, I reach down and twist the left plug cap, and Shazzam! I have a 2-cylinder bike again, it never misses again the 100+ miles home. The CX/GL bikes have resistor caps, with a collection of springs, spacers and resistors made of brass aluminum and steel, and are know to be problematic. I resolve to toss the spacers and resistors in favor of brass rod I have at home.

The rest of the trip home is uneventful, if wet. I stopped at a rest stop to -well, you know - and warm my now soaked hands under the hand-dryer. The volunteer at the booth comes over as I’m struggling to get my wet gloves on under the protection of the roof overhang to let me know they have coffee. “I can’t hear a thing - earplugs!” I tell him, pointing to my helmet. Didn’t stop him, and he stands and talks to me. I can’t hear a thing over Steve Miller in my helmet at sufficient volume to overcome the 70 mile and hour wind, bike and rain noise, so I just smile and nod a lot, tell him to have a nice evening and ride off.  I’ve found that the inside coat pocket is a great place to stuff my mini-disc player, but it’s REALLY hard to push the tiny buttons through the coat layers with Thinsulate insulated gloves. I just crank it and ignore everyone. My girlfriend has gotten used to it; she does not even try to talk to me anymore until I have my helmet off.  Speaking of her, she is waiting at my apartment when I get home. She has towels at the ready, has the heat in my bedroom cranked and my alarm set for tomorrow, since I have to work at my part time job. She helps drape my wet clothes all over, kisses me goodnight and leaves me to munch a Hot Pocket and get some much-needed sleep.

Remember the over-booties? I think they made things WORSE, as my feet were soaked, and even the ends of my pants/silks were wet.  They will not be going back into the tail trunk, but bet the pant liners will! I’ll stick to sealskins until I can get a pair of truly waterproof boots. The gloves let me down too, as mentioned, and worse, they let my t-shirt sleeves get wet, which wicked all the way to the elbows. I am going to have to have better wet weather gear sorted out by August, that’s for sure! I actually got too cold, as it took me about half-hour in my bed before I stopped shivering. The odd thing is I did not feel that cold until I stopped and the vest quit heating me. My ‘core’ was reasonably warm, but all my extremities were wet and/or cold, not a good combination. The ride home was real close to 3 hours, not too bad, considering. Total ride was 345 miles with the 160 miles home all wet and cold ones. I feel much better having gotten to go for a ride; it was just what I needed.  Now I can go start that new job on Thursday with a clear head.

Ken ‘Slowpoke’ Morton

 

=====

Ken Morton  K7FLE    '82 Honda GL-500
SilverWing "baby-wing"

Milwaukie, OR, USA 
   www.geocities.com/k7fle

Do not mess with Dragons, for you are crunchy, and good
with ketchup.
